um mackenzie work is an australian born
writer and scholar
she is known for her writings on media
theory critical theory new media and the
situationist international her best
known works are a hacker manifesto and
gamer theory but among many others such
as general in uh general intellects
general intellects and um
uh capitalism is dead um she is
professor of media and cultural studies
at the new school in new york city
um and with that uh
let's turn it over to mackenzie we'll be
back for a custom conversation
afterwards
hi there and thank you for having me at
gray area festival my name is mackenzie
walk
let me start by sharing some
slides with you
all right here we go
um
all right so uh
worlding protocol
is our theme and i want to
um i'm going to address both the words
in that title in a minute uh i want to
sort of frame it in terms of a project
here of
what would democratic collaborative
knowledge work look like how could we
think about that as a project
and a project where
no forms of knowledge
are considered sovereign over all the
others so
just imagine a utopian world where um
engineers don't think they have the
answer to everything and humanities
goals don't think they have all the
answers and artists don't think they're
doing something completely different for
everybody else and economists don't rule
out lives we have all forms of knowledge
being able to work
in a collaborative democratic
egalitarian way what would that world
look like and maybe we have to create
something like that knowledge practice
in order to avert the worst possible
consequences of the anthropocene
another thing i'd like to say about this
is that the
gaps and incompatibilities between all
these different ways of knowing might
themselves be worth knowing it's not
like all of these different kinds of
knowledge can can sort of add up to
something that there's always sort of
inconsistencies and incompatible
compatibilities between them
i do want to talk though about
the humanities
as a set of knowledges
uh there might be interesting
contributors of speculative qualitative
concepts derived from the study of the
archives of various cultures and
emotions in the present forms of various
cultures
i just had
all right so
let me give some examples
um drawn from various uh humanity
scholars that i know and here i want to
talk about protocol and whirling before
we move on to some other things
alexander galloway wrote this actually i
think really helpful use about a useful
book about protocol
in 2003 i think nearly 20 years ago
uh and the key point to that is that a
key concept is a protocol is controlled
with decentralization
so let's not get ourselves a distributed
network is one that lacks control
and protocol here you could think of as
uh
ways of deciding at a border
uh what passes and what doesn't but
where there's an asymmetrical relation
at that juncture at that border as to
what can pass and what can't
so maybe one of our questions is can
protocols be democratized and what might
that look like
um maybe we don't want everything being
able to pass every border all the time
but who decides and where and how seems
like a set of key questions to ask about
protocols
now let's uh think a bit about worlding
and here i want to think about the work
of eduardo villaros de castro sorry i
can't pronounce that in portuguese and
i'm drawing mostly on a book with the
wonderful and intentionally ironic title
of cannibal metaphysics
which is mostly about
amerindian
myth
uh myth or really world view the
philosophy from the uh from the amazon
and here it's important to realize there
are lots of very different worldviews
and we can't really always
uh uh
see what other ones look like from our
own that's kind of why we need to sort
of work of
ethnographers and others to show other
world news to us
and uh what's interesting to me about uh
vivaros de castro is the idea of rather
than think about a multi-species world
and there's a lot of that now there's a
lot of work in
the humanities sort of the arts of
moving outwards
from the human centered uh towards what
if we incorporated other species into
how we think uh about um what it means
to be uh but uh what's interesting about
what uh feverish castro does with
amerindian world views is that they're
actually multi-people world views uh and
that's the thing that that strikes me as
interesting about it because uh virus
castro is talking about world views
uh of amerindian peoples uh who happen
to be human who kind of propose that
there are world views of other species
but where those other species think of
themselves as people and us as not so
from the point of view of jaguars
jaguars are people and we humans are not
so it gets us to the incompatibility and
irreconcilability of world views i think
so when we think about welding who's
welding and others weldings incompatible
might be some questions that uh work
like this would help us
ask
and then let me just gesture a little
bit towards the work of elizabeth
pavinelli
we have like life writing is sort of a
big category it's taught in universities
now but what's sort of non-life writing
maybe uh there's a little bit too much
privileging of the living when we think
about even extending uh towards the
uh incorporating other species and how
we think and act uh so how do we
incorporate what rocks how do we uh
incorporate the lithosphere
uh so
geogeontology this is the title of this
book
uh playing ontologies which is you know
philosophies of being and jira meaning
the earth
and uh i want to just dwell on one
particular story that povernelli tells
from anson bay in the northern territory
in australia
and here is that place in one system of
representation
uh as a kind of uh nautical map if you
like
but maybe there's others and
what interests me is
uh the figure of chippewa which is a
name
from a story that's also a name of a
coastal title creek that's
in the hidden away in that map and let
me just tell you
triple story
as told to povernelli by uh
uh ruby
who is and this is my my sort of
redaction of um elizabeth's redaction of
this traditional story
here's the story chippel is a beautiful
teenage girl who decides to dress as a
young man making hunting implements
immense clothes she travels down the
coast doing different things including
spearing a wallaby
and the cox of her story is an encounter
with an older man a bird tells her the
man approaches so she lies on her belly
to hide her female nurse
now thinking triple a young man the
older man
bids her to get up and cook the wallaby
and chipper refuses so he takes the ball
of me and leaves another bird comes and
tells that man that the older man that
triple is female he returns they have a
fight and he wins the fight
so i love it because it's a transgender
story about a greek but transgender is
an anachronistic one western term
and because it's a story that
narrates
a land form
and is a way in which the humans of this
particular area
are able to think about the rocks and
the creek and the landforms themselves
as in a sense people of that area
that need a certain kind of care or they
might sort of turn away
from the human people who are operating
in that world
and it's interesting to me that it's a
story that in in modern western terms
it's between genders it's a place
between i used to be placed between
different peoples who spoke slightly
different languages it's a place between
regions
it's a creek that you have to cross
different uh kind of ecologies different
places where you can find different
kinds of food and also different genders
is in there as well
so in in what way could we learn from uh
traditional forms of storytelling and
knowledge how to connect to those kind
of things in a sort of more abstract
modern world the kind that we live in
one thing i'll point out about uh
traditional uh australian knowledge i
don't know about in this example but
certainly in other parts of
uh australia there's forms of
storytelling that predate the holocene
that go back to the late pleistocene era
so these uh this is knowledge
continuously being produced and shared
and passed on uh with some degree of
accuracy
uh through the entire geological epoch
that um
sort of western people like myself our
entire knowledge of the world is
confined to the holocene and his people
with a prior knowledge
uh that they've been able to pass on
towards the anthropocene so maybe if one
wants to learn about the change in you
and how to live through the change in a
geological era there are reasons
traditional knowledges might be able to
help us with that but you know it's
almost their job to help us maybe it's
their job to endure as best they can and
during us is then us being
white western settlers like myself maybe
that's that's their business
uh and i want to just table another
uh
colleague in the humanities doing
different kind of work and the concept
of the wake
in christina sharp
um
and the subtitles on blackness and being
and the wake here is
wakefulness so being uh alert to
uh
the
sort of political cultural historical
dimensions of one situation but wake
also means mourning
uh and it means the ripple effect uh
left by passage of a ship and the
the
image is drawn from the passage of slave
ships
and then what is the ongoing
kind of residue and trace of that
uh through contemporary in this case
american life also black diasporic life
elsewhere
and how do we pay attention to these
stories that tend to get left out uh
even of modern forms uh of knowledge
archives and so forth
so i'm just giving some examples of
people i think who are doing interesting
work uh in the humanities at the moment
that's you know dealing with parts of
you know the
uh the elephant that we all in our
variously disabled ways try to touch
various parts of producer knowledge of
but what would be collaborative
knowledge work in the anthropocene in
particular
call it something else if you like but
we seem to have entered a geological era
that's no longer the holocene
and one way i would explain that is that
maybe what's happening is that
geological time is
moving faster now than historical time
uh we seem to just relentlessly produce
more and more of the same
uh technical economic commodifier
exploitative world
but geological time is changing way
faster than that uh the season's seen
time scenes out of joint seasons happen
at the wrong time
whether where it shouldn't be california
is on fire every summer
as is my homeland of australia so what
would be concept adequate to this
present situation
and more importantly ways of working
that get us out of the
habits of you know only sort of
market-based authoritarian-based
relations between different forms of
knowledge production
so
maybe one thing we need to do is or
could do or could use his ways of
working with concepts
what do i mean by concept well this is
the simplest way i can explain it a good
fact is mostly true
about something in particular and a good
concept is slightly true but about a
whole bunch of things so how do we
generate concepts that enable us to grab
the factual world by the handful and
then be able to articulate different
concepts together so that knowledge
workers can kind of produce ways of
interacting with the world
and hopefully redeeming the possibility
of a world uh in the process so that's
that's if you like the big picture about
practice
uh all right so let me throw in some
more uh colleagues friends and
collaborators um ben is also in this uh
festival
uh but i find this concept of the stack
really useful for thinking differently
about the
sort of techno sphere that we're
inhabiting and here is the a diagram of
the stack has been proposed as we think
about it where
we
uh interact
as users through our devices
uh through a series of layers of uh
attack it's a technical term and
expanded into a more general metaphor so
as user we're dealing with an interface
that has a layer of addressability
that's able to know where certain things
are and connect them
we may or may not be working in some
version of the city which gathers
together the human people part of it
uh but it's connecting uh our physical
addresses to addresses in a cloud but at
the end of the day what it's doing is
extracting
resources out of the earth beyond any
capacity of the earth to regenerate that
so that's that's basically the stack
uh i thought about it a little
differently as uh the thing vector
uh and it's to me the the to sort of put
a slightly different metaphor against
that one
uh maybe we see things a little bit
differently
uh so the the
if that's the stack which particular
possibilities of connection through it
get articulated and why is is then
a slightly more uh to press a little
more critically on it
would be how i'd want to think about it
uh and then we can start thinking about
who owns and controls those vectors who
designs the protocols you know for whom
so that we end up with a kind of a
technosphere
uh the stack of vectors through it of
protocols controlling the movement
through it uh there's kind of extracting
more out of the earth than the earth can
possibly sustain and in the interests of
home so billionaires can go to space
great that's really not a world that's
going to last very much longer
so
uh here's a map of what that world might
look like by uh martin varga
and it's interesting to me that the the
image of this map of metaphor of this
map is to think um basically empire is
basically to think uh a sort of
geopolitics sort of uh these kind of
giant kinds of corporation that are
maybe of something of a new type and
might require sort of a new language to
think them
so who does own and control
uh protocols stack and decide which
vectors are possible through it i'm
going to call the ruling class of our
time vectorless class owners and
controllers of vector effectively give
it its simplest definition uh in
geometry is a line of fixed length but
no fixed position it's a term that means
slightly different things from different
sciences but let's keep it that simple
so it's something that has uh fixed
quality uh techniques tend to have
particular affordances but the question
of how it's deployed and for whom and
why remains open and something that
we can ask critical questions about
so what does the course class do control
value chain through control of
information it's a little different to
capitalism where you sort of have to own
the the factory uh in order to
exploit the labor that's in it uh
bachelor's class isn't that interested
in owning the
physical means of material production
but of owning the
information
uh that controls
those processes of production and
consumption so maybe that's a new kind
of ruling class
and and requires a different language to
think it
uh if there's a new ruling class maybe
there's a new kind of subordinate class
alongside the others there are still
farmers in the world and still workers
but maybe there's also a hacker class
producers of information produces a
difference so it's different to um
industrial labor we your job is designed
so you just keep doing the same thing
over and over again it's not that kind
of work you have to actually produce
difference it could be captured as
intellectual property uh in the
interests of a class that owns and
controls information that uh those who
are familiar with oil and that don't get
to own
so that's a sort of basic
diagram if you like how i want to think
the
larger historical
dimensions of the technosphere that
we're all inside of
and i think it's worth having a map of
power of conflict in that world um
because these are sort of the questions
that were confronted yeah it's like how
can we redesign the vector on the fly to
do something other than extract surplus
information out of populations whether
they be of rocks other species
in the virus to castro's terms other
people
and and human out of human labor out of
the hacker class and so on
so can the vector do something other
than extend the wake of forgetting and
violence
in christina sharp's turn specifically
of
the african diaspora
one can think of other ways that uh the
vector does violence uh to
um the material and and living and human
dimensions of the world and the third
question is can historical time catch up
to geological time and avert the worst
uh mass extinction the good futures are
mostly gone now how do we avoid the
worst of the bad futures that would seem
to be the if one is future oriented that
would be the the tasks for the president
the answer is nobody knows nobody knows
how to do that uh
and i'm i'm kind of skeptical of people
who think they've got you know like all
embracing answers so there's completely
unprecedented circumstances that we find
ourselves in
so
my wager is on speculative collaborative
non-hierarchical knowledge and
experimentation as a key component of
thinking our way to the possibilities
and futures we might sort of actually
want
so i've talked a little
bit mostly about work but what about
play if we're talking about
experimentation
maybe there's ways that
a more playful approach is going to
yield possibilities that work doesn't
uh now i i wrote a little game of theory
about the way that
uh it's like the whole of life has been
kind of gamified we're all inside the
sort of matrix of vectors and all
encouraged to think of ourselves as like
players in and against it and against
each other
uh so there's there's a way in which
play gets uh turned into a sort of uh
commodify information commodified
universe you know where it's as if the
playing field was
level and uh and all that it's sort of
not really the case yeah does anybody
really believe that
um but maybe there have been kind of
other guards of play that escaped that
that felt like play was the way to kind
of imagine other cities for other lives
different forms of uh
organization ways of being human uh ways
of being with things other than the
human
uh so game of theory was my sort of more
pessimistic book about the enclosure of
the world in game space for the benefits
of the vectors class
this other beach beneath the street is
about the sort of tradition of uh that
we can sort of latch on to finding the
archive of uh ways of thinking playfully
about the possibility of living
differently
so i i wanted to finish up with some
uh work i've been doing more recently
that connects to that i've done sort of
historical work uh on avant-garde
movements i love avant-garde because
they're sort of
um experimenting with the media
of their time and looking for
uh you know you know like amazon kind of
like the antennae of the culture
uh sort of trying to detect what could
be possible and to bring out of the
future of something that could be
possible in the in the present to make
that that future real to sort of
physically manifest it uh on the left
here is
michelle bernstein eskiyon unknown woman
and and he the board uh in the late 50s
um plotting kind of
um uh the revolutionization of art and
everyday life and in the whole world
over uh
overcome thousand bottle of wine which
you notice has been spilled on the table
i love that uh uh
one and have grand ambitions and i
paired it with a photograph of um myself
at um boston pacific club after i hosted
my own
uh
techno rave birthday party with some uh
trans uh raver friends uh because i've
been trying to work on um
what can i learn from the play space
that is
uh
new york queer trans
uh raver techno nightlife
so maybe there's areas of
experimentation in ways of
being human and being together
in that universe and maybe there's ways
that that world
uh
either is looking for ways to
inhabit our present
uh because there isn't a future
or ways that other futures might be
possible just in terms of how we
interact with each other
so that's that's the work i've been
doing and i'm gonna share some some
slides and talk a little bit about that
that current work
um all right so uh i'm interested in
mostly in kind of illegal warehouse
frames where you're sort of like
descending into spaces that are sort of
remade
for other purposes and there's ways in
which the old industrial spaces to be
light industrial spaces of the city
sometimes yields these spaces that can
be repurposed
and one can think about then the
repurposing
retrofitting if you like we don't get to
make uh worlds entirely out of nothing
where it's having to like repurpose a
world temporarily
to become something else to create a
situation that we might want to inhabit
for an evening where light
sounds the mix of people
uh how people dress all the chemistry is
going to create the possibility
of being together something that humans
seem not all that humans of this kind
seem not all that good at doing
so i became a kind of uh ethnographer of
um you know sort of queer
uh trans
ray of night life
there's me probably would
making notes on my phone and taking a
picture
uh at one of these these particular
events and we see people
interacting we see a little bit of uh
deck that's running the audio uh
constructing like sonic spaces seems
really key
uh here also to kind of uh drowning out
the uh chatter of the human
uh and the sound of the city with even
more sound and so like texturing it
it's maybe one of the keys to creating
kind of other possibilities
this is someone putting their
fingers over my phone because i'm too
close to the
center of the dance floor when i'm
trying to take a picture
i was only trying to photograph the
ambience i was not trying to take photos
of people but still some of these
parties are strictly no photo
uh you're really not supposed to
document them no selfies of you
with the dj behind you no pictures of
the people no videos
and i think that's kind of an
interesting principle
uh in a world of kind of overexposure
uh to kind of
hive off something that's not that
that's going to sort of refuse that
you know use of the the vector
uh
it's it's a paradoxical sort of
relationship there's a way in which you
only find out about these parties by
following certain um instagram accounts
some of which are private
uh
so there's there's a way social media
sort of creates a space a possibility
but one that's been attempting to be a
little bit remote from it where one can
experiment
um
in the you know sort of
relative intimacy of bodies with each
other
uh
with you know sort of um
fog and light and so forth
so this this creates a bit of a problem
as a researcher how am i supposed to
research a world where i can't really
document it um because i think the
consequences of thinking the no photo
ban as a researcher was like oh i
probably shouldn't name where this party
is or who runs it or who is there
what happens there stays there
so how to do that and i started to think
about how we can think about ambiences
how we can get away from certain kinds
of storytelling uh and write about what
the ambient creation of a situation
collaboratively by groups of people
looks like and maybe that's a useful way
of sort of decentring
narratives of you know heroic
individuals stories with beginnings
middles and ends
what's a language and a photographic
practice that's going to kind of evoke
the middle the the in betweenness uh of
people with each other are various kinds
of
modern techniques and tools we're
bringing together so that we kind of
imagine what it would be like to be
human together uh at least in this
temporary space and time this little
pocket of time that we can open up
before the police arrive
or before it all shuts down at 8am in
the morning and we all stumble out
into the into the overly bright light
of the morning
so yeah i've been trying to photograph
the ambiences of spaces
uh kind of think through what kinds of
ambiences help generate what kinds of uh
interactions between people
um
to get us away from
this sort of situation really where
there's like one person speaking to many
uh what's like you know you still have a
host and a promoter of the solar dj
uh some people follow particular djs and
are fans of them including myself but
how do you sort of move it back towards
kind of collaborative production uh
collaborative production of knowledge
but here knowledge of one's own body in
relation to others
uh in the dark in the flashing light
uh with some chemical alteration of your
perception and so forth uh some of the
ways one could learn from that with what
goes wrong with it i don't want to make
out that
uh rave is the space of utopia because
it's not uh it's a space where
bad things happen where people get
uh sexually assaulted and harassed where
uh people overdose but people just
behave like complete
like as as punishers
of others but then what are the ways
within the extended community of people
who are
queer and trans rapers in on the new
york scene how are those
conflicts and behaviors mediated
away from the dancefloor but also on it
would be a set of questions i think that
are useful for thinking through what you
know what kind of life is possible
what's at the limits of the human
without imagining we have to all be
perfect angels but where our bad selves
have ways of um being
uh checked accepted checked
uh and moved back into the possibility
of being with others
so
the
ambience is
conducive if you like to states that
take you out a little bit of you know
kind of obsession with ones
uh
with oneself into a kind of dissociated
states
where you can sort of blend into the
environment towards others but not to
increase too much on their boundaries
are there ways in which you can think of
ray practice then as sort of analogues
for ways that we might
uh kind of interact
with each other outside of that space so
there's other ways that one can learn
um through the creation of situations
where you take away certain conventions
of sensory perception of
recognition of each other
such that a different way of being
together might be possible i don't say
new there's really nothing new about
this and speaking of of wakes there's
ways in which
uh i think it's very important to
recognize that new kind of techno music
nightlife in the united states owes a
tremendous amount to african-american
culture and and those of us like myself
who come to it from elsewhere have you
recognized i think that we're guests in
uh culture we didn't really create we
may have added some flavors too but
uh it's it's we're recognizing that
we're in the wake of the historical
process
uh of people who only had the knight and
had to create this space to be away from
the police away from racism and so forth
uh this also it applies in an analogous
not identical way to the queen and trans
people often we don't have anywhere else
so we have to create these spaces where
i want to say different rules apply but
different modes of interaction apply
but where we get to be people uh in
worlds where you know
even as a white trans woman there's
worlds where i'm not uh i'm not people
i don't get to be human
uh i'm not recognized as belonging to
that to the human community so we create
spaces where we are and then hopefully
we can bring some of that back out into
the rest of the world
so that's um basically what i want to
leave you with i kind of
started with
ways of thinking about what the
humanities might bring to a
collaborative practices of knowing
together
i walk through some
work that i think is kind of interesting
that we can draw together here
uh i've sort of highlighted you know
both the
[Music]
power dynamics of the present which i
think there's a new kind of rule in
class
uh one really doesn't seem to have any
uh uh ways of
uh surviving the after scene uh
boys want to be on rockets going to
space
uh sorry it's not really gonna work for
the rest of us
so
um
are there ways we could
work together collaboratively to produce
different positive knowledge and other
ways of playing together that might
produce different kinds of knowledge
uh a knowledge that you can make
operative and the example that i've
given of that is sort of queen and trans
new or nightlife not that it's anything
special about that it just happens to be
the little world but i i i inhabit at
night when i'm not
teaching and doing these things during
the day
so that's what i want to contribute to
um gray area festival and thank you for
having me i'll be back for question time
hi everybody welcome back we're live
with mackenzie work who you just heard
from
um that was a wonderful presentation and
you led us through so many different um
ideas and you know i just wanted you
know the one idea that i'm the most
familiar with and i've studied before is
viveros de castro and his concept of the
ontological turn um you know and this
this idea that we all are
existing from our own subjective points
of view and those are shaped
collectively but are so different
from every being to every other being
um and i was wondering if just to start
us off you could tell you could tell us
a little bit more about about the about
this idea and
how
thinking thinking through the world in
this ontological way might help us to
reach a different kind of welding
protocol
yeah and and you know i'm not an
ethnographer uh i'm only a reader of
eduardo viveros de castro you know so i
so
and and i i sort of think of my work as
interstitial in that sense i'm not an
expert in these things but is there a
way of reading in between so that's a
little caveat
and um and his sort of key work is on uh
amerindian
uh ontologies is i guess a word you
could use and it's sort of i think
really helpful to imagine that there
could be plural ones
uh like on ontology meaning you know
like what is being what has being uh
there's a tendency to think that uh
would have to be a universal um but
maybe it's not and there's there's an
interesting way that uh viveiros de
castro reads uh amerindian
uh world views from
sort of from the amazon or thereabouts
uh as having this sort of perspectival
quality where
uh
you know to the to the humans the the
jaguars are
are not people because humans are people
but to the jaguars
the humans are not people because
jaguars are people like it's able to
imagine this reversibility uh of worlds
and i and i think that's oh well there's
there's something sophisticated about uh
amerindian philosophy that that uh
the sort of german idealist tradition
that's inherited doesn't have so yeah i
found found that incredibly useful and
that would be sort of one of the
the tasks for collaborative knowledge uh
of enduring the anthropocene is is how
to put those things on the same kind of
plane formally so that we can kind of
think about uh different ways of knowing
and how different ways of knowing have
come out of different practices of being
in the world
totally um
and i think you know this this idea of
collaborative knowledge building i think
is really powerful and really important
and you know you mentioned that you know
of course this is coming from amerindian
peoples and cultures that are much more
ancient than our sort of contemporary
ideas about knowledge or or subjectivity
um
and that's something we've been trying
to emphasize at this festival you know
we can't you know so i think that um i
forgot who said this this weekend but
someone said uh i think it might have
been uh
i'm gonna forget but they said that you
know looking to the past is looking to
the future um and that's something that
really resonated with me and has
continued to resonate with me um you
know since then and so i mean
we're talking about the anthropocene and
this period of geo of like drastic
geological change um on top of drastic
cultural and social change as well um
and so what i mean not to be too
fanciful but
in in your vision what comes what comes
after the anthropocene like what comes
next and you know
yeah i think that i'm curious about you
know what can we do to
alter the course that that we're
currently on
yeah i first i'd sort of like to say
that for me i also see indigenous
knowledge as contemporary rather than
always being from the past like it's
modern it's as modern as we are uh so so
to think of all of these different ways
of inhabiting presence uh and also
different ways of operating with time
[Music]
i don't think like let's start with no
one really knows how to endure uh a kind
of rapid deterioration
uh of possibilities of worlds it's very
very unevenly distributed
uh they're already climate uh
migrants and refugees
uh they're ready places where uh human
habitation is only possible
but like maybe there is something to
learn from uh
indigenous worlds in the sense that the
experience of a world ending already
happened
uh for a lot of indigenous people so oh
well that's a that's a thing that those
of us who are from settler cultures
could probably do to learn from at this
juncture
donna haraway talks about can we you
know make the anthropocene as short as
possible to get as quickly as possible
to
um things that are habitable
uh for as much of life as as we can
manage i don't know who the wheels and
these phrases that i'm making but i
think that's sort of the task that the
um the the sort of the better futures
are are disappearing in the same way
that certain species are you know kind
of as we speak
we've got a uh
got a question from the chat from the
audience at large um
talking about this from eve
talking about knowledge production work
and play and how they intersect do you
have any thoughts on how knowledge work
has professionalized and how people who
aren't knowledge professionals
can contribute their play slash work
more effectively
yeah that's a good one and i think there
are
ways in which
um
the a certain kind of play and here i'm
i'm really just retelling uh a book by
johann hoisinger called homolutens
there's this way in which maybe all
knowledge and culture comes out of play
would be voicing as you know sort of
grand uh
meta narrative but then sort of
become sort of formalized into
institutions not necessarily a bad thing
but for hosing maybe there's a way that
the institutions become too constraining
and then the games sort of simply become
repetitive
uh and for hoisin is the origin of
everything
so
why have we not amended the american
constitution in a very long time there
was a time when it seemed like the play
of rewriting the rules was open and then
it stops uh and we now have this whole
school of legal thought about
never modifying it at all you know like
originalism so for hoising a law comes
out of play
uh and so does uh philosophy you know
like hoisinger thinks about the contest
between rival philosophers before the
tyrant you know as as the origin of how
we got that but but at some point it
became a very formalistic
uh sort of discourse about arguments
that seem a little disconnected from
everyday life
so yeah maybe there's ways we need to
sort of like um very carefully open the
the space between
formal and rule-based knowledge and
kinds of knowledge that isn't like we
still need forms of error correction
around what we think we know otherwise
you end up with conspiracy theories and
things like that so you know
just because you looked up some random
stuff on
like google doesn't mean you researched
something that's not really knowledge
uh so
protocols of error correction are kind
of important but there may be different
ways that those work and are interested
in australian indigenous knowledge that
seems to be able to
uh sort of error correct and pass on
knowledge
back to the late police to scene so we
do have some knowledge that predates the
holocene that could be useful given that
we have another change in geological
error to uh epoch to survive
so yeah it's it's a thing to be done
a little bit carefully but but uh
i kind of think that uh any knowledge
system whether in a formal space or not
can have its own kind of rules of error
correction uh and to be open to that
the um you know this in thinking through
these you know the the anthropocene and
um you know the the disasters that that
face us i i was just reading prague
khanna's recent book move where he talks
about mobility and global change and um
you know his vision for the future comes
from you know his vision of the future
is a nomadic one where people move to
resources where they are based on
availability and need and um you know
the world isn't this kind of fixed place
where you get this suburban house and
you stay there and that's kind of your
place um you know
and you know this and not you know
thinking through like the contemporary
the contemporaneity of um
of these these ideas which are largely
as you mentioned are largely considered
i guess ancient or or older um you know
and just seeing the cycle kind of like
continue to
continue to spin i don't know i was
really i that uh that vision for the
future kind of struck me and it was it
was an interesting one for for sure um
you know and in another kind of vision
of the future you know you at the
beginning of your presentation you
brought up general intellects and the
your book and you know all the different
thinkers that are embedded in that book
and how you know you
kind of pause it that it's not really
possible to think through ideas anymore
through one kind of singular you know
figurehead um we need this kind of more
kaleidoscopic more more more broad
inclusion of multiple and potentially
fragmented ideas um and i was wondering
if uh if you could talk a little bit
about um how you came to to understand
uh thought this way and how that and how
this change from the singular you know
iconic figurehead to this more expanded
way of i guess collaborative knowing
came about
yeah i don't i don't know my therapist
has probably got some good answers as to
why i'm just i really don't do well with
certain kinds of authority and and i'm
dependent as a scholar on people who
have like spent their entire life
reading derrida for example like i rely
on that and i and i don't i respect that
that one would choose a master thinker
and and operate in that space
uh i just kind of chose not to because
i'm interested in what sort of in
between
but to sort of not do that thing of sort
of like averaging or leveling or just
like mushing things together
um which is a bit of an american grad
school syndrome you know where it's like
i'm gonna like mush in some foucault and
some judith butler and whoever and and
it sort of doesn't really add up you
know
um
it's like wait a minute like these
things are choices in a way you can't
just mush it all together sometimes
so yeah i wrote two books one's
generally lex and the other is censoria
those are like collections of pieces
where there's a little bit of a game
like part where i tried to get it to
about four and a half thousand words
only on each thinker and usually focused
on one book and sometimes not quite
their famous one uh to to kind of all
right so how can we sort of get uh
a little nest of concepts out of this
person's work and sort of put it
alongside somebody else but without sort
of trying to mush them together
so that the reader has got like
different perspectives
and they're mostly from humanities and
social sciences that's in the arts
because that's words that i know but
they're still sort of like incompatible
and i think maybe that's
necessary
uh or at least useful skill in the 21st
century is to be able to think a little
perspectively that there's probably
something true and right in some of
these different perspectives but not
everything and and to be comfortable in
that interstitial space in between
yeah i mean it's it you know
nothing is ever one thing you know um
and i think that that's something that
we've been talking a lot about over the
over the course of the festival is how
we can hold all of these different ideas
and all of these different world views
kind of at the same time because if we
can't understand the complexity of the
world and reduce it to something else
we'll never be able to
truly understand it um and maybe we
can't ever truly understand it anyway uh
but uh you know at least we can try to
get get closer
um we have another
comment from the chat here
um hannah asks if utopia is a project
that has failed many times before how
might we understand various avant-garde
guards or cultures that aim to create
alternative presence and what
relationship do they have to futurity
yeah
um
i mean there's
utopia got caught up in a kind of cold
war discourse
uh or in the west you know like the
soviet union failed because it was
utopian project whereas like we in the
west don't have one that's not true like
capitalism is also a utopian project
and there's also the sense of utopia is
like some perfect ideal
um but it's not really the utopian
literature's not really like that um
utopias are more practical than any
other kind of literature
uh charles fourier who yes really did
think the seas would turn to lemonade uh
was one of the few writers of his era
who really asked who was going to deal
with waste who's going to deal with
trash and you know like fourier was
really on that and tried to think that
through whereas the
bourgeois novel that is contemporary
with him like no one ever even goes to
the toilet but don't think about what
you would do with it you know so i think
we need to sort of reframe utopia uh and
i and i think they all came true and
they all worked up to a point but they
all just have some fatal flaw
uh as well where they don't quite work
perfectly in a way
uh so there's yeah one has to sort of
rethink what what utopia is in a way and
i've i've sort of used the
uh in in molecular red i'm sort of
thinking actually you know utopia is
sort of like a useful concept if you
think of it as like maximum practicality
like the opposite of what we're usually
uh sort of trained to think it as
uh and more recent work i've sort of
uh shied away from that a little bit
uh and tended to think more about it's
not utopia because bad behavior is still
going to happen there's nothing we can
do about humans
but
maybe there's ways of thinking about
situations that are more habitable
interesting than others
but maybe they're temporary and maybe
they don't scale maybe that's the best
we can ever do so there's i think a
little i'm in a little pessimistic mood
at the moment
uh where i kind of think that's sort of
you know like uh you could actually pull
off
communism for about five hours for 300
people
uh with some good drugs and techno uh
but then you have to go home to
capitalism and
have your labor be exploited or whatever
you know but it was but it was good for
a morning
but how can that scale i'm not sure no
one knows you know like no one knows how
to make anything scale at the moment or
endure
yeah oh that's really in no to to endure
that's really interesting i mean it does
feel like we're in this really
disposable time i mean
ideas are disposable identities are
disposable um it goes way beyond like
consuming a physical good um
you
you know just not to switch to focus too
much but um you you well actually first
of all um
in general intellects i just want to
shout out that one of the thinkers that
you focus on is wendy chun who was also
a speaker here at gray area festival and
talked about her new book discriminating
data which was awesome
and kind of the structure of the world
around us but you also mentioned another
great area of speaker ben bratton and
his idea of the stack
and i think that both of these you know
ways of analyzing the the technological
infrastructure around us are really
useful um and i'm wondering you know
in this is a question i posed to a
couple other folks but i'm curious to
hear your thoughts um
the opacity of technology seems to be a
real barrier to understanding the whole
context that we exist in and that's
something that continues to you know
confront us as a roadblock and i'm
wondering how you know in in trying to
think through this moment um and even
think through past moments and then from
that extrapolate future ones
how
do you
grapple with the
opacity of the stack the the
incomprehensibility of it the
illegibility of it and the exclusion of
it as well um and you know how can we
think through
how can we approach it closer in order
to
perhaps build something more sustainable
i meant to put a slide in about wendy's
work because i knew ben was here and so
i put a little bit in about that so i
apologize to wendy i kind of like the
slide fell out of the deck and then i
didn't talk about it uh and i've i've
learned so much from both of them by the
way uh i'm huge fans of both wendy china
and ben bratton uh
yeah like it's sort of like a little bit
the
the very definition of a technology is
is a thing that hides what it does
uh so it's it's kind of like uh
a thing that will allow you to
do something in particular but you won't
notice that you're not doing it
something else is like this would be one
you know the very opacity could be the
definition of what a technology is
uh and then
there's a kind of um
uh
phenomenological panic that technology
sets off where we sort of need to feel
ourselves to be separate from the
techniques uh and to sort of demonize
who's perceived to be closer or to be
invaded or infected by it it's never us
it's always somebody else is too
technical you know uh
so there's like there's this sort of
failure to think through we're all
you know like secondary products of
you know many layers deep of techniques
just so our bodies will function at all
you know there's no non-technological
human and probably never was you know
not an archaeologist but i i sort of get
the impression the hand and the tool
seem to evolve together it's not like we
have hands let's do something with it
you know it's like it's not really the
history of uh of hominins right
so we've sort of not really felt through
that we're always inside it and always
in relationship to it and then we're not
encouraged to
think about it too much because it's
sort of in the interests of people who
own and control technologies that we
don't know too much about it you know
like these things appear to us as sort
of like closed devices that you're not
even allowed to open anymore
so yeah it's kind of hard and that's why
i do media studies you know because i i
feel like media technology studies are
kind of uh related and and let's not
have border wars around disciplines but
think those things together it's like
yeah how do you get people to think
uh critically in a good way
uh about the sort of embeddedness that
technology is not just something you can
blame as the
bad thing because we're in it and it's
in us uh and it's nor is it helpful to
like you know like finger the person
who's
too technical and i'm now one of those
people like trans women are like your
body is artificial you're not biological
it's like honey nobody is everybody's
propped up by meds and prosthetics and
we're all disabled at some point in our
lives
you know it's like yeah you're not trans
but you you're born with a cesarean you
know you came into the world
through technics you know like whether
that or you're a home birth that's also
a technics that is also right there's a
there's skill and art in in how you get
a human into the world probably has been
for a long time so
yeah that's sort of a challenge like
they're they're like just even to begin
there's some some little conceptual
uh shifts you have to make to be able to
think uh the donald harroway does this
beautifully in cyborg manifesto it's
from 1984 as the canonic version it's
still a great text for sort of thinking
yeah like we're woven into it it's woven
into us so let's move on to a different
set of questions
absolutely i mean i i learned a lot from
french anthropologist ludovic kupai who
really talks a lot about this and how
everything is a technology from the way
we stand up to the way that we blink you
know nothing is nothing is nothing is
truly biological it's all learned in one
way or another um and those those
learned behaviors those technologies of
the body then become things that um you
know are concretized through social
action and that kind of wrestle and kind
of fit in with whatever biological like
inherent
facet might be um but i mean you know to
to justin moore from anthropology which
is of course my area of study and one
thing i'm really passionate about um i
love your ethnographic approach to
exploring these shared play spaces and i
thought that was such an in that was
such a that was such a cool thing um i
mean you know in thinking about
phenomenology and how things feel to us
i think that in a lot of instances um
you know
figuring out what the phenomenology of
that shared space is and describing it
and understanding it and presenting it
and trying to capture it in small ways
while in some ways reductive also i
think is the the perfect first entry
point into understanding um because we
we understand everything through our
bodies and so i was wondering if you
could just talk a little bit more about
that project and how it's been going so
far and you know what you've kind of
learned from you know adopting some of
these these techniques in your in your
research
yeah i think i was always an amateur
ethnographer like uh um hacker manifesto
came out of you know the kind of um
uh avant-garde of
sort of media art do-it-yourself pump
rock techniques and so on of the 90s you
know uh and i just sort of hid the
method a little bit because some people
didn't in that world also didn't want to
be too public or too visible uh so i
sort of wrote it as if that wasn't you
know like the footnotes will will tell
you what worlds i was getting things
from
uh and and game of theory also came out
of just hanging out with um
the kind of people
uh who were like the avant-garde of game
design
uh you know from around about 2000
uh when i stopped working on manifesto
and i'm doing the game stuff and then
the early 2000s there's this sort of
little renaissance of game design going
on and i just like hung out with those
people
um
so yeah it's like hackers gamers ravers
if i if i finished the fourth one would
be hustlers but that would be a whole
other project and i need a different
method because i think those are the
four
um persona that that strike me is
interesting at the moment
um yeah but i thought this time i'd
highlight the method a little bit and
the
writing i'm doing a little bit of it's
published in noon magazine a little bit
of the writing i've been doing on um
queer and trans rape culture in new york
city uh sort of puts me in the story a
lot more uh rather than sort of just
writing the concepts like i'm sort of
more interested in uh here's a
description of the situation
uh
here's uh how i
what i'm recording of how other people
perceive that so it's not just my
perspective
but i'm making that more a little bit
clearer and here's the concepts like how
do concepts emerge out of particular
practices is i think that i'm sort of i
think that's an enduring theme in all of
this work
so yeah the writing is different um
and and more fun i kind of i couldn't
write after i transitioned i actually
couldn't write like do real writing for
three years and i feel like i'm back but
the method and the style of it has
changed a little bit
um and yeah and it's just sort of like
oh like i always you know i wasn't as a
scholar i was never an archive rat as a
scholar like i can work in archives but
i don't love that and it's not my main
focus like i love learning from
contemporary cultures
and sitting at the feet of people who
created things and then seeing who's
you know the advanced guard of it now
and that sort of thing so i felt like
i'd do that more explicitly but then i'm
in the double blind because i can't
really you know like name some of the
things that are interesting to me you
know i can i can obviously i'm going to
quote certain people who have said
public things about what's going on
uh but yeah it's like oh there's there's
a way in which uh like i don't believe
there's a trump methodology like all
let's a priority take all of the methods
to be equal um but to me there's
something
uh there's a particular thing that the
ethnographic has to contribute
and i'm i'm a sort of amateur and and
late starter in that uh as a method but
i find it really helpful well it's i
mean it makes so much sense why i love
all of your books then because if i mean
you can you can kind of feel that and
feel those those the way that you've
gone about that research even if it's
not presented exactly in that way and i
think that the i think it comes through
really really strongly um
you know i we're just about out of time
which i'm really bummed about because i
have a million things that i wanna i
wanna ask you about um but
uh
i am i'm i mean it's really exciting
that you're working on this project with
the rave scene i mean what a fun
research project you know especially
when you're playing for granted money
you know um
i never apply for grant money what
i never apply for grant money oh i mean
just in general you know hey oh i got to
go to the office and it's you know
awesome social club
i don't i don't i don't spend any time
raising money for this stuff i just go
do it um
oh i should take a page out of your book
that's awesome
well mackenzie thank you so so much for
being here with us today um i know
you're just coming back for some travel
and must be kind of chat lagged and
tired so we really appreciate your time
on this evening um everybody you can go
and uh we're gonna drop some links into
the chat where you can find all of
mckenzie's books i encourage everyone to
yeah the new book on verso is
i believe it's it's capital is dead
capitalism is dead or is our newer
capital is dead there's uh a book on
cathyacker called philosophy for spiders
from here wait the cathy
book of course that's a new and that's
one i haven't gotten my hands on yet so
i'm excited
well thank you wade thank you barry my
thanks so much for being here thank you
so much really perfect way to close us
up so
thank you
bye everybody bye